Manage data -> Migration guide to ECH or ECE updated (#1426)
elastic/docs-content: manage-data/migrate.md

To use this method, the new cluster must have access to the snapshot repository that contains the data from the old cluster. Also ensure that both clusters use [compatible versions](/deploy-manage/tools/snapshot-and-restore.md#snapshot-compatibility).

For more information, refer to [Restore into a different cluster](/deploy-manage/tools/snapshot-and-restore/restore-snapshot.md#restore-different-cluster)

::::{note}
For {{ece}} users, while it is most common to have Amazon S3 buckets, you should be able to restore from any addressable external storage that has your {{es}} snapshots.
::::

The following steps assume you already have a snapshot repository configured in the old cluster with at least one valid snapshot containing the data you want to migrate.

### Step 1: Set up the repository in the new cluster [migrate-repo-setup]

In this step, you’ll configure a snapshot repository in the new cluster that points to the storage location used by the old cluster. This allows the new cluster to access and restore snapshots created in the original environment.

::::{tip}

> If your new {{ech}} or {{ece}} deployment cannot connect to the same repository used by your self-managed cluster, for example if it's a private NFS share, consider one of these alternatives:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If your new {{ech}} or {{ece}} deployment cannot connect to the same repository used by your self-managed cluster, for example if it's a private NFS share, consider one of the following alternatives:
```

* [Back up your repository](/deploy-manage/tools/snapshot-and-restore/self-managed.md#snapshots-repository-backup) to a supported storage system such as AWS S3, Google Cloud Storage, or Azure Blob Storage, and then configure your new cluster to use that location for the data migration.
* Expose the repository contents over `ftp`, `http`, or `https`, and use a [read-only URL repository](/deploy-manage/tools/snapshot-and-restore/read-only-url-repository.md) type in your new deployment to access the snapshots.
::::

1. On your old {{es}} cluster, retrieve the snapshot repository configuration:

    ```sh
    GET /_snapshot/_all
    ```

    Take note of the repository name and type (for example, `s3`, `gcs`, or `azure`), its base path, and any additional settings. Authentication credentials are often stored in the [secure settings](/deploy-manage/security/secure-settings.md) on each node. You’ll need to replicate all this configuration when registering the repository in the new ECH or ECE deployment.

    If your old cluster has multiple repositories configured, identify the repository with the snapshots containing the data that you want to migrate.

> 2. Add the snapshot repository on the new cluster:

Reviewer: avoid two stacked introductory colons ("cluster:" "Considerations:")

```suggestion
2. Add the snapshot repository on the new cluster.
```

>     The new cluster must register a snapshot repository that points to the same physical storage location used by the old cluster. This ensures the new cluster can access the existing snapshots.

Reviewer: I think this is kind of a summary of the entire task (connecting the old snapshot repo to the new cluster) and therefore could be removed. let me know if this is serving a different purpose and I am misreading

Author: yes, it feels duplicate, thanks

    Considerations:

>       * If you’re migrating [searchable snapshots](/deploy-manage/tools/snapshot-and-restore/searchable-snapshots.md), the repository name must be identical in the source and destination clusters.

Reviewer: is this true for a simple restore, or only if you want to restore search functionality?

Author: true for a simple restore. if the index being restored is actually a searchable snapshot, the only way to make it working in the destination is as a searchable snapshot where the snapshot is located in a repo with the same name, that's the reason for the message.

As far as I know (but I could be mistaken), there's no way to restore the data from a searchable snapshot index towards a standard index, which by the day would be a great feature and mechanism to convert a searchable snapshot index into a regular index, something I think we don't have today.

      * If the old cluster still has write access to the repository, register the repository as read-only to avoid data corruption. This can be done using the `readonly: true` option.

>     To configure a custom snapshot repository for your {{ech}} or {{ece}} deployment, follow the steps for the storage provider used by your existing repository:

Reviewer: I think we can simplify this because most of this is clear from context, and it almost sounds like you're doing something brand new instead of just plugging the old thing and the new thing together. ignore this edit if you think it is not better I'm a little in the weeds

```suggestion
    To connect the existing snapshot repository to your new deployment, follow the steps for the storage provider where the repository is hosted:
```

Author: I like the concept of `custom repository` (that has always existed in ECH) because the platform comes with its own repositories (found-snapshot) for backups, and here the `user` is adding a snapshot repository at deployment level, now known by the platform.

If you find a better way of explaining this than using `custom repo` I'm totally opened for a change.

What we have never documented is doing the same in ECE. All our docs about snapshots in ECE rely on repositories defined at platform level (for automatic backups of deployments), which is the equivalent to the found-snapshots repos in ECH. Creating a custom snapshot repo at deployment level in ECE has never been documented, but it's perfectly possible (similar to ECH).

Let me know if what I've been trying to explain here is clear. About custom snapshot repo vs something else we can continue discussing, I agree `custom repository` is not intuitive at all, it's just what I've read for years in ECH docs.

    * **Amazon Web Services (AWS) Storage**
        * [Store credentials in the keystore](/deploy-manage/tools/snapshot-and-restore/ec-aws-custom-repository.md#ec-snapshot-secrets-keystore)
        * [Create the repository](/deploy-manage/tools/snapshot-and-restore/ec-aws-custom-repository.md#ec-create-aws-repository)
    * **Google Cloud Storage (GCS)**
        * [Store credentials in the keystore](/deploy-manage/tools/snapshot-and-restore/ec-gcs-snapshotting.md#ec-configure-gcs-keystore)
        * [Create the repository](/deploy-manage/tools/snapshot-and-restore/ec-gcs-snapshotting.md#ec-create-gcs-repository)
    * **Azure Blob Storage**
        * [Store credentials in the keystore](/deploy-manage/tools/snapshot-and-restore/ec-azure-snapshotting.md#ec-configure-azure-keystore).
        * [Create the repository](/deploy-manage/tools/snapshot-and-restore/ec-azure-snapshotting.md#ec-create-azure-repository).
    
    ::::{important}

>     Although the previous instructions are focused on {{ech}}, you should follow the same steps for {{ece}} by configuring the repository directly **at the deployment level**.

Reviewer: hmm, sounds like we should make it clear that this is possible in the snapshot docs. do you think it makes sense to open an issue to add new applies tags and notes with a use case?

Author: do you mean configuring repositories at deployment level in ECE? Totally agreed, we should improve that visibility.
It's not a very common use case but a perfectly valid one, and I'm sure some customers are already doing that, as if for example they want a repo dedicated to searchable snapshots they have to create it at deployment level, and not managed by ECE.

We should create an issue to add this info and link from ECE docs to ECH docs + making sure the ECH docs in this are also applies_to ECE + explain it a bit.

Author: Created https://github.com/elastic/docs-content/issues/1494 as a follow up issue for this.

>     Although the previous instructions are focused on {{ech}}, you should follow the same steps for {{ece}} by configuring the repository directly **at the deployment level**.

Reviewer: it's not really "previous" because you're still in the same section IMO.

```suggestion
    Although these instructions are focused on {{ech}}, you should follow the same steps for {{ece}} by configuring the repository directly **at the deployment level**.
```

    **Do not** configure the repository as an [ECE-managed repository](/deploy-manage/tools/snapshot-and-restore/cloud-enterprise.md), which is intended for automatic snapshots of deployments. In this case, you need to add a custom repository that already contains snapshots from another cluster.
    ::::

### Step 2: Run the snapshot restore [migrate-restore]

> Once the repository has been registered and verified, you are ready to restore any data from any of its snapshots to your new cluster. You can do this using {{kib}} management UI, or directly with the {{es}} API.

Reviewer: no manner is more direct than the other

you don't have API instructions here - consider linking to another resource that has them, or to the relevant endpoint in the API docs.

```suggestion
After the repository has been registered and verified, you are ready to restore any data from any of its snapshots to your new cluster. You can do this using {{kib}} management UI, or using the {{es}} API.
```

> For extra details about the contents of a snapshot refer to [](/deploy-manage/tools/snapshot-and-restore.md#snapshot-contents).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For details about the contents of a snapshot, refer to [](/deploy-manage/tools/snapshot-and-restore.md#snapshot-contents).
```

To start the restore process:

1. Open Kibana and go to **Management** > **Snapshot and Restore**.
2. Under the **Snapshots** tab, you can find the available snapshots from your newly added snapshot repository. Select any snapshot to view its details, and from there you can choose to restore it.
3. Select **Restore**.
4. Select the index or indices you wish to restore.
5. Optionally, configure additional restore options, such as **Restore aliases**, **Restore global state**, or **Restore feature state**.

>     Refer to [Restore a snapshot](/deploy-manage/tools/snapshot-and-restore/restore-snapshot.md) for more details about restore operations in {{es}}, including API based examples.

Reviewer: consider moving this up so the link is closer to the 'you can do it this way or that way' statement

you can also say "this document explains how to blah blah in kibana. Refer to ... for ... API based examples."

    
6. Select **Restore snapshot** to begin the process.

> 7. Verify that the new index is restored in your deployment with this query:

Reviewer: could round this out to indicate that you could run it for each index you want to check
